__Notes from the Substrate IBC working group - 4 August 2020__

* Video link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ogcV2DXnzZA

* Attendees: Meher Roy (Chorus One), Sam Hart (Interchain GmbH), Billy Rennekamp (Interchain GmbH / ICF), Louis Lui (c-dot), Philip Stanislaus (Centrifuge, SnowFork), Dominik Harz (Interlay), Jazear Brooks (SnowFork), Dieter Fishbein (Web3), Moritz (Web3), David Hawig (Web3), Alistair Stewart (Web3), John Wu (c-dot), Yuanchao Sun (c-dot), Sorawit Suriyakarn (Band), Paul Nattapatsiri (Band), Thomasz Drwiega (Parity), Joe Bowman (Chorus One), Brian Crain (Chorus One), Ryan Park (Terra), Gregory Hill (Interlay), Jake Kim (Terra), Daniel Hong (Terra), Chris Goes (Interchain GmbH), Sean Braithwaite (Informal), Alexei Zamyatin (Interlay), Aidan Musnitzky (SnowFork)

* Chorus presented on their bridge. Presentation at: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/12n7JNpn1vM2oUEdeFZTnU9zHmJ_MHW1n-D2t96vfVRU/edit?usp=sharing. 
A demo was executed showing bi-directional failure and happy paths. 

* Alastair: What’s the difficulty you are having with ancestry? The requirement of importing every block should not be there. There was a conversation on this point, but the conclusion is that the Chorus Substrate light client can be upgraded to be more efficient in terms of gas costs:

* __Current Implementation__: Imagine Blocks 1, 2, and 3. 3 contains a justification, but 1 and 2 don’t. 1 and 2 are processed before 3, their data is stored but the headers are not marked as finalised. When 3 is supplied with justification, 1,2 and 3 are marked as finalised. In the current implemenation, all headers are input into the Cosmos SDK chain, and are marked final when a justification from a descendant block finalises the ancestor blocks. 

* __Alternative Implementation__: Block 3, with justification is put in first and accepted as finalised. Once the justification is accepted, 2 and 1 can be input into the light client as and when needed. It is not necessary to pass in headers 1 and 2 if the applications don’t need those headers. So, the optimistic case is 3 gets finalised and headers for 1/2 never need to be input into the Cosmos chain at all. If an application requires headers 1 or 2, then we accrue the additional costs of uploading/verifying those headers. This approach will cut down on verification costs whenever users don’t need the headers for 1/2.  

* An additional detail is that a “hash-chain” design upgrade from Web3/Parity would allow us to skip even more blocks. The nature of that upgrade was not covered in the call. 

* Upcoming milestones for Chorus work
	- The immediate milestone is polish Quantum Tunnel and open source. Open source the Substrate Pallet containing the Tendermint light client. 
	- We’re in the process of securing funding for the next parts of the implementation.
	- We would like to define the needs of Terra and Band. Build minimal components of the IBC stack required to service those demands. 
  - Next stages are analysis of customer requirement and defining how IBC will be integrated into Substrate.
  - Another question is how best to leverage Informal’s and CDoT’s work to build the IBC implementation.

* Sam: Question on updates to the Polkadot consensus algorithm, and how much work it would take to keep the light client abreast of these updates.
  - Alastair: Upgrades are not expected to break Chorus One’s code. It will make some parts easier, but should not end up breaking stuff.

* Sam: Band are running a different WASM virtual machine. How does Chorus work translate to the Band use case
  - Suryawit: We are interested to relay data from Cosmos to Substrate. One way bridge is the most material for us. Full IBC would be nice, but one way bridge is fine to start with. One way bridge would continuously supply block header of Cosmos chain to Substrate. Verify that something is in the Cosmos chain - iterate through multi-store and IAVL tree. Don’t worry too much about our WASM runtime. It’s not relevant to the work here. 

* Next Tuesday: Ryan and SH from Terra present on their requirements. If time permits, CDoT’s demo. 
